# epitweetr: Early Detection of Public Health Threats from Twitter Data

[epitweetr site](https://github.com/EU-ECDC/epitweetr)

[Report bug & issues](https://github.com/EU-ECDC/epitweetr/issues)

The `epitweetr` package allows you to automatically monitor trends of tweets by time, place and topic. This automated monitoring aims at early detecting public health threats through the detection of signals (e.g. an unusual increase in the number of tweets for a specific time, place and topic). The `epitweetr` package was designed to focus on infectious diseases, and it can be extended to all hazards or other fields of study by modifying the topics and keywords.

The general principle behind `epitweetr` is that it collects tweets and related metadata from the Twitter Standard API versions 1.1 (https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs/twitter-api/v1/tweets/search/overview/standard) and 2.0 (https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs/twitter-api/tweets/search/api-reference/get-tweets-search-recent) according to specified topics and stores these tweets on your computer on a database that can operate to calculate statistics or as a search engine. `epitweetr` geolocalises the tweets and collects information on key words, URLs, hashtags within a tweet but also entities and context detected by the Twitter API 2.0. Tweets are aggregated according to topic and geographical location. Next, a signal detection algorithm identifies the number of tweets (by topic and geographical location) that exceeds what is expected for a given day. If a number of tweets exceeds what is expected, `epitweetr` sends out email alerts to notify those who need to further investigate these signals following the epidemic intelligence processes (filtering, validation, analysis and preliminary assessment).

The package includes  an interactive web application (Shiny app) with five pages: the dashboard, where a user can visualise and explore tweets (Fig 1), the alerts page, where you can view the current alerts and train machine learning models for alert classification on user defined categories (Fig 2), the geotag page, where you can evaluate the geolocation algorithm and provide annotations for improving its performance (Fig 3), the data protection page, where the user can search, anonymise and delete tweets from the epitweetr database to support data deletion requests (Fig 4), the configuration page, where you can change settings and check the status of the underlying processes (Fig 5), and the troubleshoot page, with automatic checks and hints for using `epitweetr` with all its functionalities (Fig 6). 

On the dashboard, users can view the aggregated number of tweets over time, the location of these tweets on a map and different most frequent elements found in or extracted from these tweets (words, hashtags, URLs, contexts and entities). These visualisations can be filtered by the topic, location and time period you are interested in. Other filters are available and include the possibility to adjust the time unit of the timeline, whether retweets/quotes should be included, what kind of geolocation types you are interested in, the sensitivity of the prediction interval for the signal detection, and the number of days used to calculate the threshold for signals. This information is also downloadable directly from this interface in the form of data, pictures, and/or reports.

More information is available in the epitweetr peer-review publication ( https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2022.27.39.2200177).
